
        EPISTLES I. EPISTLE XVI. TO QUINCTIUS
        He describes to Quinctius the form, situation, and advantages of his country house: then declares that probity consists in the consciousness of good works; liberty, in probity.
        Ask me not, my best Quinctius, whether my farm maintains its master with corn- fields, or enriches him with olives, or with fruits, or meadow land, or the elm tree clothed with vines: the shape and situation of my ground shall be described to you at large.
        There is a continued range of mountains, except where they are separated by a shadowy vale; but in such a manner, that the approaching sun views it on the right side, and departing in his flying car warms the left. You would commend its temperature. What? If my[ very] briers produce in abundance the ruddy cornels and damsens? If my oak and holm tree accommodate my cattle with plenty of acorns, and their master with a copious shade? You would say that Tarentum, brought nearer[ to Rome], shone in its verdant beauty. A fountain too, deserving to give name to a river, insomuch that Hebrus does not surround Thrace more cool or more limpid, flows salubrious to the infirm head, salubrious to the bowels. These sweet, yea now( if you will credit me) these delightful retreats preserve me to you in a state of health[ even] in the September season.
        You live well, if you take care to support the character which you bear. Long ago, all Rome has proclaimed you happy: but I am apprehensive, lest you should give more credit concerning yourself to any one than yourself; and lest you should imagine a man happy, who differs from the wise and good; or, because the people pronounce you sound and perfectly well, lest you dissemble the lurking fever at meal- times, until a trembling seize your greased hands. The false modesty of fools conceals ulcers[ rather than have them cured]. If any one should mention battles which you had fought by land and sea, and in such expressions as these should soothe your listening ears:" May Jupiter, who consults the safety both of you and of the city, keep it in doubt, whether the people be more solicitous for your welfare, or you for the people 's;" you might perceive these encomiums to belong[ only] to Augustus when you suffer yourself to be termed a philosopher, and one of a refined life; say, pr'ythee, would you answer[ to these appellations] in your own name? To be sure-- I like to be called a wise and good man, as well as you. He who gave this character to- day, if he will, can take it away to- morrow: as the same people, if they have conferred the consulship on an unworthy person, may take it away from him:" Resign; it is ours," they cry: I do resign it accordingly, and chagrined withdraw. Thus if they should call me rogue, deny me to be temperate, assert that I had strangled my own father with a halter; shall I be stung, and change color at these false reproaches? Whom does false honor delight, or lying calumny terrify, except the vicious and sickly- minded? Who then is a good man? He who observes the decrees of the senate, the laws and rules of justice; by whose arbitration many and important disputes are decided; by whose surety private property, and by whose testimony causes are safe. Yet[ perhaps] his own family and all the neighborhood observe this man, specious in a fair outside,[ to be] polluted within. If a slave should say to me," I have not committed a robbery, nor run away:"" You have your reward; you are not galled with the lash," I reply. "I have not killed any man:"" You shall not[ therefore] feed the carrion crows on the cross. "I am a good man, and thrifty: your Sabine friend denies, and contradicts the fact. For the wary wolf dreads the pitfall, and the hawk the suspected snares, and the kite the concealed hook. The good,[ on the contrary,] hate to sin from the love of virtue; you will commit no crime merely for the fear of punishment. Let there be a prospect of escaping, you will confound sacred and profane things together. For, when from a thousand bushels of beans you filch one, the loss in that case to me is less, but not your villainy. The honest man, whom every forum and every court of justice looks upon with reverence, whenever he makes an atonement to the gods with a wine or an ox; after he has pronounced in a clear distinguishable voice," O father Janus, O Apollo;" moves his lips as one afraid of being heard;" O fair Laverna put it in my power to deceive; grant me the appearance of a just and upright man: throw a cloud of night over my frauds. "I do not see how a covetous man can be better, how more free than a slave, when he stoops down for the sake of a penny, stuck in the road[ for sport]. For he who will be covetous, will also be anxious: but he that lives in a state of anxiety, will never in my estimation be free. He who is always in a hurry, and immersed in the study of augmenting his fortune, has lost the arms, and deserted the post of virtue. Do not kill your captive, if you can sell him: he will serve you advantageously: let him, being inured to drudgery, feed[ your cattle], and plow; let him go to sea, and winter in the midst of the waves; let him be of use to the market, and import corn and provisions. A good and wise man will have courage to say," Pentheus, king of Thebes, what indignities will you compel me to suffer and endure.' I will take away your goods:' my cattle, I suppose, my land, my movables and money: you may take them.' I will confine you with handcuffs and fetters under a merciless jailer.' The deity himself will discharge me, whenever I please. "In my opinion, this is his meaning; I will die. Death is the ultimate boundary of human matters.
      
