
        EPISTLES I. EPISTLE XV. TO C. NEUMONIUS VALA
        Preparing to go to the baths either at Velia or Salernum, he inquires after the healthfulness and agreeableness of the places.
        It is your part, Vala, to write to me( and mine to give credit to your information) what sort of a winter is it at Velia, what the air at Salernum, what kind of inhabitants the country consists of, and how the road is( for Antonius Musa[ pronounces] Baiae to be of no service to me; yet makes me obnoxious to the place, when I am bathed in cold water even in the midst of the frost[ by his prescription]. In truth the village murmers at their myrtle- groves being deserted and the sulphurous waters, said to expel lingering disorders from the nerves, despised; envying those invalids, who have the courage to expose their head and breast to the Clusian springs, and retire to Gabii and[ such] cold countries. My course must be altered, and my horse driven beyond his accustomed stages. Whither are you going? will the angry rider say, pulling in the left- hand rein, I am not bound for Cumae or Baiae:--but the horse 's ear is in the bit.) [You must inform me likewise] which of the two people is supported by the greatest abundance of corn; whether they drink rainwater collected[ in reservoirs], or from perennial wells of never- failing water( for as to the wine of that part I give myself no trouble; at my country- seat I can dispense and bear with any thing: but when I have arrived at a sea- port, I insist upon that which is generous and mellow, such as may drive away my cares, such as may flow into my veins and animal spirits with a rich supply of hope, such as may supply me with words, such as may make me appear young to my Lucanian mistress). Which tract of land produces most hares, which boars: which seas harbor the most fishes and sea- urchins, that I may be able to return home thence in good case, and like a Phaeacian.
        When Maenius, having bravely made away with his paternal and maternal estates, began to be accounted a merry fellow-- a vagabond droll, who had no certain place of living; who, when dinnerless, could not distinguish a fellow- citizen from an enemy; unmerciful in forging any scandal against any person; the pest, and hurricane, and gulf of the market; whatever he could get, he gave to his greedy gut. This fellow, when he had extorted little or nothing from the favorers of his iniquity, or those that dreaded it, would eat up whole dishes of coarse tripe and lamb 's entrails; as much as would have sufficed three bears; then truly,[ like] reformer Bestius, would he say, that the bellies of extravagant fellows ought to be branded with a red- hot iron. The same man[ however], when he had reduced to smoke and ashes whatever more considerable booty he had gotten;' Faith, said he, I do not wonder if some persons eat up their estates; since nothing is better than a fat thrush, nothing finer than a lage sow 's paunch. In fact, I am just such another myself; for, when matters are a little deficient, I commend, the snug and homely fare, of sufficient resolution amid mean provisions; but, if any thing be offered better and more delicate, I, the same individual, cry out, that ye are wise and alone live well, whose wealth and estate are conspicuous from the elegance of your villas.
      
